TELCODOCS:462 - Release notes for OpenShift sandboxed containers alon… (#42866)
openshift/openshift-docs: sandboxed_containers/sandboxed-containers-release-notes.adoc

:_content-type: ASSEMBLY
[id="sandboxed-containers-4-10-release-notes"]
= {sandboxed-containers-first} {sandboxed-containers-version} release notes
include::_attributes/common-attributes.adoc[]
include::_attributes/virt-document-attributes.adoc[]
:context: sandboxed-containers-release-notes

toc::[]

[id="sandboxed-containers-1-2-about-this-release"]
== About this release

These release notes track the development of {sandboxed-containers-first} {sandboxed-containers-version} alongside Red Hat {product-title} {product-version}.

This product was previously released as a Technology Preview product in {product-title} 4.9 and is now generally available and enabled by default in {product-title} {product-version}.

[id="sandboxed-containers-1-2-new-features-and-enhancements"]

> == New features and enhancements
> 

Reviewer: We usually have an intro sentence for h2s in RNs. Here's what we use in OCP:
```suggestion
== New features and enhancements

This release adds improvements related to the following components and concepts.
```

[id="kata-metrics-rn"]
=== Kata specific metrics and dashboard

> The {sandboxed-containers-operator} now deploys an osc-monitor daemonset. This enables the collection of metrics specific to workloads running in sandboxed containers (including metrics about the hypervisor and the Guest OS instances). In addition, a pre-configured dashboard provides insights into {sandboxed-containers-first} components, such as the total number of lightweight VMs enabled in a cluster and the CPU/memory consumption per VM.

Reviewer: - We have some guidance for how to refer to API objects generally and as object refs: https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/blob/main/contributing_to_docs/doc_guidelines.adoc#general-references
- ISG: avoid using parentheses in general text and use commas where possible for better readability.
- ISG: avoid slashes in most cases
```suggestion
The {sandboxed-containers-operator} now deploys an `osc-monitor` daemon set. This enables the collection of metrics specific to workloads running in sandboxed containers, including metrics about the hypervisor and the Guest OS instances. In addition, a pre-configured dashboard provides insights into {sandboxed-containers-first} components, such as the total number of lightweight VMs enabled in a cluster and the CPU and memory consumption per VM.
```

 All metrics, as well as the dashboard, are available in the web console. For more information, see xref:../sandboxed_containers/monitoring-sandboxed-containers.adoc#monitoring-sandboxed-containers[Monitoring {sandboxed-containers-first}].

[id="enhanced-logging-rn"]
=== Enhanced logging

Administrators can now collect enhanced logs for {sandboxed-containers-first} runtime components. Enhanced logs are available when the CRI-O log level is set to `debug`. These logs are collected by the must-gather tool, or can be viewed in the node journal.
For more information, see xref:../sandboxed_containers/troubleshooting-sandboxed-containers.adoc#sandboxed-containers-enable-debug-logs_troubleshooting-sandboxed-containers[Enabling debug logs for {sandboxed-containers-first}].

[id="node-eligibility-rn"]
=== Check node eligibility to run {sandboxed-containers-first}

> Administrators can now check the eligibility of cluster nodes to run {sandboxed-containers-first}. This feature uses the Node Feature Discovery (NFD) operator to detect  node capabilities. Eligible nodes are labeled with `feature.node.kubernetes.io/runtime.kata`, and the {sandboxed-containers-operator} uses this label to select candidate nodes for installation.
> 
> The administrator must deploy the NFD operator to use this feature, create a specific *NodeFeatureDiscovery* custom resource, and enable `checkNodeEligibility' when creating the *KataConfig* custom resource.
> //For more information, see xref:../sandboxed_containers/deploying-sandboxed-container-workloads.adoc#sandboxed-containers-check-nodes_deploying-sandboxed-containers[Checking the eligibility of cluster nodes to run {sandboxed-containers-first}].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Administrators can now check the eligibility of cluster nodes to run {sandboxed-containers-first}. This feature uses the Node Feature Discovery (NFD) Operator to detect  node capabilities. Eligible nodes are labeled with `feature.node.kubernetes.io/runtime.kata`, and the {sandboxed-containers-operator} uses this label to select candidate nodes for installation.

The administrator must deploy the NFD Operator to use this feature, create a specific *NodeFeatureDiscovery* custom resource, and enable `checkNodeEligibility` when creating the *KataConfig* custom resource.
//For more information, see xref:../sandboxed_containers/deploying-sandboxed-container-workloads.adoc#sandboxed-containers-check-nodes_deploying-sandboxed-containers[Checking the eligibility of cluster nodes to run {sandboxed-containers-first}].
```

[id="OSC-compatibility-with-CNV"]
=== {sandboxed-containers-first} compatibility with {VirtProductName}

Users can now run {sandboxed-containers-first} on clusters with {VirtProductName} when VMs are configured correctly.
For more information, see xref:../sandboxed_containers/understanding-sandboxed-containers.adoc#sandboxed-containers-with-other-ocp-components_understanding-sandboxed-containers[Using {sandboxed-containers-first} with {VirtProductName}]

[id="support-AWS-bare-metal"]

> === {sandboxed-containers-first} availability on AWS bare-metal (tech preview)

Reviewer: Only hyphenate bare metal when used as an adjective for disambiguation, for example: "bare-metal installation". Also, we refer to it as "Technology Preview" in docs.
```suggestion
=== {sandboxed-containers-first} availability on AWS bare metal (Technology Preview)
```

> Users can now install {sandboxed-containers-first} on AWS bare-metal clusters. This feature is in tech preview and not fully supported. For more information, see xref:../sandboxed_containers/understanding-sandboxed-containers.adoc#understanding-sandboxed-containers[Understanding {sandboxed-containers-first}].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Users can now install {sandboxed-containers-first} on AWS bare-metal clusters. This feature is in Technology Preview and not fully supported. For more information, see xref:../sandboxed_containers/understanding-sandboxed-containers.adoc#understanding-sandboxed-containers[Understanding {sandboxed-containers-first}].
```

[id="sandboxed-containers-1-2-bug-fixes"]
== Bug fixes

* Previously, using loop devices in a sandboxed container was not possible due to missing kernel modules. With this release, these kernel modules are included in the package. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/KATA-1334[*KATA-1334*])

> * Previously, the `MachineConfigPool` (MCP) created by the Operator to track nodes with the `Kata` runtime installed was not automatically removed on deletion of the `KataConfig` custom resource (CR). With this release, the deletion of the `KataConfig` CR results in the removal of the `kata-oc` MCP. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/KATA-1184[*KATA-1184*])

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Previously, the `MachineConfigPool` (`MCP`) object created by the Operator to track nodes with the `Kata` runtime installed was not automatically removed on deletion of the `KataConfig` custom resource (CR). With this release, the deletion of the `KataConfig` CR results in the removal of the `kata-oc` `MCP` object. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/KATA-1184[*KATA-1184*])
```

> * Previously, when you created a `kataConfigPoolSelector` field and changed it, the {sandboxed-containers-operator} did not apply the change. With this release, the Operator acts on changes to the `kataConfigPoolSelector` field in the CRD and adapts installations of the runtime on nodes accordingly. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/KATA-1190[*KATA-1190*])

Reviewer: Because this is the only instance of CRD, it should be spelled out.
```suggestion
* Previously, when you created a `kataConfigPoolSelector` field and changed it, the {sandboxed-containers-operator} did not apply the change. With this release, the Operator acts on changes to the `kataConfigPoolSelector` field in the custom resource definition and adapts installations of the runtime on nodes accordingly. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/KATA-1190[*KATA-1190*])
```

> * Previously, the `SourceImage` field was displayed on the web console and using the field had no effect on the installation. With this release, the unused `SourceImage` field is no longer displayed when creating the `KataConfig` custom resource from the web console. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/KATA-1015[*KATA-1015*])

Reviewer: Because CR was already defined, it can be abbreviated.
```suggestion
* Previously, the `SourceImage` field was displayed on the web console and using the field had no effect on the installation. With this release, the unused `SourceImage` field is no longer displayed when creating the `KataConfig` CR from the web console. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/KATA-1015[*KATA-1015*])
```

[id="sandboxed-containers-1-2-known-issues"]
== Known issues

> * If you are using {sandboxed-containers-first}, you might receive SELinux denials accessing files or directories mounted from the `hostPath` volume in an {product-title} cluster. These denials can occur even when running privileged sandboxed containers, since privileged sandboxed containers do not disable SELinux checks.

Reviewer: ISG: Use since in relation to the passing of a period of time, not as a synonym for because.
```suggestion
* If you are using {sandboxed-containers-first}, you might receive SELinux denials when accessing files or directories mounted from the `hostPath` volume in an {product-title} cluster. These denials can occur even when running privileged sandboxed containers because privileged sandboxed containers do not disable SELinux checks.
```

+

> Following SELinux policy on the host guarantees full isolation of the host file system from the sandboxed workload by default, and provides stronger protection against potential security flaws in `virtiofsd` or QEMU.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Following SELinux policy on the host guarantees full isolation of the host file system from the sandboxed workload by default, and provides stronger protection against potential security flaws in the `virtiofsd` daemon or QEMU.
```

+
If the mounted files or directories do not have specific SELinux requirements on the host, you can use local persistent volumes as an alternative. Files are automatically relabeled to `container_file_t`, following SELinux policy for container runtimes. See xref:../storage/persistent_storage/persistent-storage-local.adoc[Persistent storage using local volumes] for more information.
+

> Automatic relabeling is not an option when mounted files or directories are expected to have specific SELinux labels on the host. Instead, you can set custom SELinux rules on the host in order to allow virtiofsd to access these specific labels. (link:https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=1904609[*BZ#1904609*])

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Automatic relabeling is not an option when mounted files or directories are expected to have specific SELinux labels on the host. Instead, you can set custom SELinux rules on the host in order to allow the `virtiofsd` daemon to access these specific labels. (link:https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=1904609[*BZ#1904609*])
```

> * You might encounter an issue where `machine-config-operator` (MCO) pod changes to `CrashLoopBackOff` state and the `openshift.io/scc` annotation of the POD shows "sandboxed-containers-operator-scc" instead of the default `hostmount-anyuid`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* You might encounter an issue where the Machine Config Operator (MCO) pod changes to a `CrashLoopBackOff` state and the `openshift.io/scc` annotation of the pod displays `sandboxed-containers-operator-scc` instead of the default `hostmount-anyuid` value.
```

+

> If this happens, temporarily change the `seLinuxOptions` strategy in the `sandboxed-containers-operator-scc` SCC to the less restrictive `RunAsAny`, so that the admission process does not prefer it over the `hostmount-anyuid` SCC. You can do this by running the following command:

Reviewer: You don't need this sentence if you're going to use it in the steps.
```suggestion
If this happens, temporarily change the `seLinuxOptions` strategy in the `sandboxed-containers-operator-scc` SCC to the less restrictive `RunAsAny`, so that the admission process does not prefer it over the `hostmount-anyuid` SCC.

+
. Change the `seLinuxOptions` strategy by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> oc patch scc sandboxed-containers-operator-scc --type=merge --patch '{"seLinuxContext":{"type": "RunAsAny"}}'

Reviewer: Missing a prompt in these code blocks.
```suggestion
$ oc patch scc sandboxed-containers-operator-scc --type=merge --patch '{"seLinuxContext":{"type": "RunAsAny"}}'
```

----

> . Restart the MCO POD by running the following commands:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Restart the MCO pod by running the following commands:
```

+
[source,terminal]
----

> oc scale deployments/machine-config-operator -n openshift-machine-config-operator --replicas=0

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ oc scale deployments/machine-config-operator -n openshift-machine-config-operator --replicas=0
```

> . Restart the MCO POD by running the following commands:
> +
> [source,terminal]
> ----
> oc scale deployments/machine-config-operator -n openshift-machine-config-operator --replicas=0
> ----
> +
> [source,terminal]
> ----
> oc scale deployments/machine-config-operator -n openshift-machine-config-operator --replicas=1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Restart the MCO pod by running the following commands:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc scale deployments/machine-config-operator -n openshift-machine-config-operator --replicas=0
----
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc scale deployments/machine-config-operator -n openshift-machine-config-operator --replicas=1
```

> oc scale deployments/machine-config-operator -n openshift-machine-config-operator --replicas=1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ oc scale deployments/machine-config-operator -n openshift-machine-config-operator --replicas=1
```

----

. Revert the 'seLinuxOptions' strategy of the `sandboxed-containers-operator-scc` to its original value of 'MustRunAs' by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> oc patch scc sandboxed-containers-operator-scc --type=merge --patch '{"seLinuxContext":{"type": "MustRunAs"}}'
> ----
> 
> . Verify that the `hostmount-anyuid` SCC is applied to the `machine-config-operator` POD by running the following command:
> +
> [source,terminal]
> ----
> oc get pods -n openshift-machine-config-operator -l k8s-app=machine-config-operator -o yaml | grep scc
> openshift.io/scc: hostmount-anyuid

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ oc patch scc sandboxed-containers-operator-scc --type=merge --patch '{"seLinuxContext":{"type": "MustRunAs"}}'
----

. Verify that the `hostmount-anyuid` SCC is applied to the MCO pod by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc get pods -n openshift-machine-config-operator -l k8s-app=machine-config-operator -o yaml | grep scc. openshift.io/scc: hostmount-anyuid
```

----
+
(link:https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=2057545[*BZ#2057545*])

> * The {sandboxed-containers-operator} pods that utilize container CPU resource limits to increase the number of available CPUs for the pod may receive fewer CPUs than requested. If the functionality is available inside the container, you can diagnose CPU resources using `oc rsh <pod>` and running `lscpu`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The {sandboxed-containers-operator} pods that use container CPU resource limits to increase the number of available CPUs for the pod might receive fewer CPUs than requested. If the functionality is available inside the container, you can diagnose CPU resources by using `oc rsh <pod>` and running the `lscpu` command.
```

+
[source,terminal]
----
# lscpu
CPU(s):                          16
On-line CPU(s) list:             0-12,14,15

> Off-line CPU(s) list:            13

Reviewer: If this is a command (`# lscpu`) and example output, it should be separated into separate code blocks.

----
+
The list of available offline CPUs will likely change from run to run in an unpredictable manner.
+

> As a workaround, you can use a pod annotation to request additional CPUs rather than setting a CPU limit. The method of allocating processors is different, and CPUs requested by means of pod annotation are not affected by this issue. Rather than setting a CPU limit, the following `annotation` should be added to the metadata of the pod:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a workaround, you can use a pod annotation to request additional CPUs rather than setting a CPU limit. The method of allocating processors is different, and CPUs requested by means of pod annotation are not affected by this issue. Rather than setting a CPU limit, the following `annotation` must be added to the metadata of the pod:
```

+
[source,yaml]
----
metadata:
  annotations:
    io.katacontainers.config.hypervisor.default_vcpus: "16"
----
+
(link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/KATA-1376[*KATA-1376*])

> * The progress of the runtime installation is shown in the `status` section of the `kataConfig` CR. However the progress is not shown if all of the following conditions are true:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The progress of the runtime installation is shown in the `status` section of the `kataConfig` CR. However, the progress is not shown if all of the following conditions are true:
```

** The cluster has a machine config pool `worker` without any members (`machinecount=0`)

> ** No `kataConfigPoolSelector` is specified to select nodes for installation

Reviewer: These sentences should have periods.

+

> In this case, the installation will start on the master nodes because the operator assumes it is a converged cluster where nodes have both master and worker roles. The `status` section of the `kataConfig` CR is not updated during the installation. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/KATA-1017[*KATA-1017*])

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this case, the installation starts on the master nodes because the Operator assumes it is a converged cluster where nodes have both master and worker roles. The `status` section of the `kataConfig` CR is not updated during the installation. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/KATA-1017[*KATA-1017*])
```
I'm not sure if it is accurate to `s/master/control plane` here?

> * When creating the `KataConfig` CR and observing the POD status under the `openshift-sandboxed-containers-operator` namespace, a huge number of restarts for monitor PODs is shown.  The monitor PODs use a specific SELinux policy that is installed as part of `sandboxed-containers` extension installation. The monitor POD gets created immediately, however the SELinux policy is not yet available, which results in a POD creation error, followed by a POD restart. When the extension installation succeeds, the SELinux policy will be available and the monitor POD will transition to `Running` state. This does not affect any of the {sandboxed-containers-operator} functionality. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/KATA-1338[*KATA-1338*])

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* When creating the `KataConfig` CR and observing the pod status under the `openshift-sandboxed-containers-operator` namespace, a huge number of restarts for monitor pods is shown.  The monitor pods use a specific SELinux policy that is installed as part of `sandboxed-containers` extension installation. The monitor pod gets created immediately, however the SELinux policy is not yet available, which results in a pod creation error, followed by a pod restart. When the extension installation succeeds, the SELinux policy is available and the monitor pod transitions to a `Running` state. This does not affect any of the {sandboxed-containers-operator} functionality. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/KATA-1338[*KATA-1338*])
```

[id="OSC-compatibility-with-CNV"]
=== {sandboxed-containers-first} compatibility with {VirtProductName}

Users can now run {sandboxed-containers-first} on clusters with {VirtProductName} when VMs are configured correctly.
//For more information, see xref:../sandboxed_containers/understanding-sandboxed-containers.adoc#sandboxed-containers-with-other-ocp-components_understanding-sandboxed-containers[Using {sandboxed-containers-first} with {VirtProductName}]

[id="support-AWS-bare-metal"]
=== {sandboxed-containers-first} availability on AWS bare-metal (tech preview)

Users can now install {sandboxed-containers-first} on AWS bare-metal clusters. This feature is in tech preview and not fully supported. For more information, see xref:../sandboxed_containers/understanding-sandboxed-containers.adoc#understanding-sandboxed-containers[Understanding {sandboxed-containers-first}].

[id="sandboxed-containers-1-2-bug-fixes"]
== Bug fixes

* Previously, using loop devices in a sandboxed container was not possible due to missing kernel modules. With this release, these kernel modules are included in the package. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/KATA-1334[*KATA-1334*])

> * Previously, the {sandboxed-containers-operator} bundle was using an incorrect value for the `com.redhat.openshift.versions` label when building the container image. With this release, the Operator is available in the correct operator catalog for {product-title} version {product-version}. (link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/KATA-1019[*KATA-1019*])

Reviewer 2: KATA-1019 was fixed in 1.1 already (and first in 1.0.2 as KATA-1012), do we need to list it here again as a bug fix? I does no harm leaving it in, but IMHO we could also drop it.

+
If the mounted files or directories do not have specific SELinux requirements on the host, you can use local persistent volumes as an alternative. Files are automatically relabeled to `container_file_t`, following SELinux policy for container runtimes. See xref:../storage/persistent_storage/persistent-storage-local.adoc[Persistent storage using local volumes] for more information.
+
Automatic relabeling is not an option when mounted files or directories are expected to have specific SELinux labels on the host. Instead, you can set custom SELinux rules on the host in order to allow virtiofsd to access these specific labels. (link:https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=1904609[*BZ#1904609*])

* You might encounter an issue where `machine-config-operator` (MCO) pod changes to `CrashLoopBackOff` state, and the "openshift.io/scc" annotation of the POD shows "sandboxed-containers-operator-scc" instead of the default "hostmount-anyuid".
+
If you encounter this issue, perform the following steps:
+

> . Change the `selinuxOptions` strategy by running the following command:

Reviewer 3: Maybe provide some more context to the user ? What about something like the following (of course this will need rewording with appropriate English ;-) ) ?

Temporarily relax the `seLinuxOptions` strategy of the "sandboxed-containers-operator-scc" SCC  to the less restrictive 'RunAsAny' so that the admission process doesn't prefer it over the  "hostmount-anyuid" SCC, by running the following command:

+
[source,terminal]
----
oc patch scc sandboxed-containers-operator-scc --type=merge --patch '{"seLinuxContext":{"type": "RunAsAny"}}'
----

. Scale a deployment by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
oc scale deployments/machine-config-operator -n openshift-machine-config-operator --replicas=0
----

. Scale a deployment again by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
oc scale deployments/machine-config-operator -n openshift-machine-config-operator --replicas=1
----

> . Change the `selinuxOptions` strategy by running the following command:

Reviewer 3: Revert the 'seLinuxOptions' strategy of the "sandboxed-containers-operator-scc" to its original value of 'MustRunAs' by running the following command:

* You might encounter an issue where the Machine Config Operator (MCO) pod changes to a `CrashLoopBackOff` state and the `openshift.io/scc` annotation of the pod displays `sandboxed-containers-operator-scc` instead of the default `hostmount-anyuid` value.
+
If this happens, temporarily change the `seLinuxOptions` strategy in the `sandboxed-containers-operator-scc` SCC to the less restrictive `RunAsAny`, so that the admission process does not prefer it over the `hostmount-anyuid` SCC.
+
. Change the `seLinuxOptions` strategy by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc patch scc sandboxed-containers-operator-scc --type=merge --patch '{"seLinuxContext":{"type": "RunAsAny"}}'
----

. Restart the MCO pod by running the following commands:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc scale deployments/machine-config-operator -n openshift-machine-config-operator --replicas=0
----
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc scale deployments/machine-config-operator -n openshift-machine-config-operator --replicas=1
----

> . Revert the 'seLinuxOptions' strategy of the `sandboxed-containers-operator-scc` to its original value of 'MustRunAs' by running the following command:

Reviewer: These should be backticks rather than single quotes.
```suggestion
. Revert the `seLinuxOptions` strategy of the `sandboxed-containers-operator-scc` to its original value of 'MustRunAs' by running the following command:
```

+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc patch scc sandboxed-containers-operator-scc --type=merge --patch '{"seLinuxContext":{"type": "MustRunAs"}}'
----

. Verify that the `hostmount-anyuid` SCC is applied to the MCO pod by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc get pods -n openshift-machine-config-operator -l k8s-app=machine-config-operator -o yaml | grep scc
openshift.io/scc: hostmount-anyuid
----
+
(link:https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=2057545[*BZ#2057545*])

> * The {sandboxed-containers-operator} pods that use container CPU resource limits to increase the number of available CPUs for the pod might receive fewer CPUs than requested. If the functionality is available inside the container, you can diagnose CPU resources by using `oc rsh <pod>` and running running the `lscpu` command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The {sandboxed-containers-operator} pods that use container CPU resource limits to increase the number of available CPUs for the pod might receive fewer CPUs than requested. If the functionality is available inside the container, you can diagnose CPU resources by using `oc rsh <pod>` and running the `lscpu` command.
```
